Once around the cosmic owl. So the
cosmic owl was the name given to this
particular image that we have here with
the two bright eyes surrounded by a face
and then the blue central region being
the beak. Now we now know what's going
on here. The two uh sides that are
making up the eye and the eye sockets
are galaxies. And the blue part in the
center is where those two galaxies are
touching. And that collision is creating
shock waves which is causing a lot of
new stars to form. And when stars form,
you get a mixture of sizes. Everything
from the small red dwarfs in large
numbers through to the rather less
common but much more powerful blue hot
giant stars. And because they are so
much more powerful and massive, they
give off a lot more light and give us
this intense blue color. But they don't
last long. And so where we see blue
stars, we know that stars have been
being formed recently. And that's the
first real clue to the fact that this is
a collisional shock front between two
galaxies.
Now the cosmic owl is in fact a very
long way away and very very old indeed.
In terms of distance, we haven't
measured the distance by any of the
normal methods that I talk about such as
parallax or uh type 1A supernovi or uh
sephid variables or any of those. This
is entirely because the light from it as
revealed by looking at the spectrum is
redshifted by a factor of 14%. We have a
red shift of 1.14
and that actually corresponds to the
expansion of the universe having
stretched the light by that amount as
the light was passing through. And if
you work all of that out, you get a
distance of 9.1 billion light years. So
the light that has been arriving into
the cameras to make this image has been
traveling 2/3 the age of the universe in
order to get to us. This is an immense
distance and it's incredible that uh we
are able to make images of these things.
So we can see the main picture, the sort
of more optically normal picture uh
where it says Z= 1.14 the red shift and
then a color enhanced image um showing
the eyes and the beak the northwest and
southeast eyes and the beak in the
center with that uh false color
rendition of it there. So fascinating
little on object very very long way away
and it was first found by the cosmos
deep field image but followed up by
spectroscopy and imaging with the James
web telescope ALMA uh at which is a
radio telescope and a VA in Chile and it
been possible to work out not only the
distance of 9.1 billion lightyears but
from that and the size that It appears
we can say that each of these two
galaxies that are forming the eyes of
the cosmic owl are about 26,000 light
years in diameter. So considerably
smaller than the Milky Way. The Milky
Way would be four times that in
diameter. And um so these are relatively
modest galaxies, but this backs up the
idea that galaxies grow big by mergers
cuz back then you wouldn't have had time
to build large galaxies um other than by
exactly what we're seeing here. Uh but
what we think we're seeing is this
galaxy collision. And quite often when
galaxies collide, you can form fantastic
structures. You can have tidal tails
thrown out um in different directions
and great swirls of new star formation
going on. But occasionally you can get
an almost headon event. And that's what
we see in this uh rather more nearby and
better image of what's called a ring
galaxy.
What's happened here is that one galaxy
has passed almost directly straight
through the middle of another one and it
creates an outwardgoing shock wave which
triggers off generations of new star
formation in a ring around the central
axis. Um, and the stars are flung out in
that direction as well. Uh, so quite
chaotic, but we don't see too many of
these because it does need rather a
head-on crash. But the symmetry of the
owl uh cosmic owl picture there rather
suggests that this is very much a
meeting of equals in a very symmetrical
manner. And we can work out that there's
about 320
billion solar masses divided roughly
equally between the two galaxies. So
about 160 billion solar masses each. So
fairly heavyweight even though they're
not particularly large at the moment,
but they will form one larger galaxy
once things calm down. And there's again
that famous picture with the blue beak
in the middle and the galaxies around
the outside. But we can delve inside
what's going on in those very bright
central regions of the galaxies. And
what we think we have is that each has a
super massive black hole in the center.
And this is where they're slightly
different. One we think is 67 million
solar masses and the other one a more
modest 26 million solar masses. Those
are pretty heavy weight. The one in the
middle of the Milky Way is only four. So
these are much more massive black holes
controlling these two colliding
galaxies. And in future, not only will
the galaxies merge, but it's highly
likely that the black holes will find
each other and merge together and create
an even more massive central object.
While they're in this rather chaotic
system, it's a lot of gas and dust being
hurled around. Indeed, whole stars being
hurled in different directions in the
galaxy by all of the shock waves. and
material is finding its way towards the
black hole and then getting into a death
spiral, an accretion disc as it spirals
in and friction heats the material up to
immense temperatures. And so we see both
of the black holes feeding and pouring
out large amounts of radiation. That's
why the central regions of those
galaxies are so bright.
For one of them, the Northwest Eye
Galaxy, we've detected that it has a jet
uh has a pair of jets, bipolar jet,
north and south along the magnetic spin
axis of the uh central black hole. The
magnetic field tends to twist as the
black hole spins rapidly and that whips
up charged particles into a couple of
beams or jets that shoot out of the
galaxy. And it seems that one of those
jets is actually also pointing into the
shockwave front uh between the two
galaxies and lighting it up where it
dumps its energy in that region.
And that shock wave and the energy from
the jet dumping into that region is
causing this huge number of new stars to
being formed. Hence the blue color where
we see a lot of the short-lived massive
blue giant stars while they're still
around knowing therefore that this is a
fairly current operation. Although I say
current, we are looking back in time.
We're looking 9.1 billion light years
away. So this event uh happened and then
the lights taken that long to travel to
us. So we are looking way back in the
early history of the universe.
And I've just going to finish up now
with a diagram of really all of that. So
the cosmic owl with the two eyes where
the black holes and the active galactic
nuclei are the jet in the northwest
galaxies north and south shooting
material out into space many many light
years
tens of thousands of light years out
emitting radio waves and then dumping
its energy and illuminating the material
and helping to trigger off the uh shock
wave. waves into starburst, creation of
huge numbers of new stars in the middle
there in the gap between the two
colliding galaxies. And so there we have
it. There is the picture of one of these
very, very old collisions, the cosmic
owl. I hope you've enjoyed that. Thanks
very much for listening.